DALLAS - President Obama said on Tuesday that the nation mourned along with Dallas for five police officers gunned down by a black Army veteran, but he implored Americans not to give in to despair or the fear that “the center might not hold.”
“I’m here to say that we must reject such despair,” Mr. Obama said at a memorial service for the officers in Dallas. “I’m here to insist that we are not so divided as we seem. I say that because I know America. I know how far we’ve come against impossible odds. I know we’ll make it because of what I’ve experienced in my own life.”
Mr. Obama acknowledged that the killings - “an act not just of demented violence but of racial hatred” - had exposed a “fault line” in American democracy. He said he understood if Americans questioned whether the racial divide would ever be bridged.
“I’m not naïve,” he said. “I’ve spoken at too many memorials during the course of this presidency.”
Mr. Obama acknowledged the limitations of his own words, and quoted from the Gospel of John: “Let us love not with words or speech but with action and in truth.”
Mr. Obama, as he has before, balanced praise for the heroism of police officers with a blunt acknowledgment of racial bias in the criminal justice system. “We can’t simply dismiss it as a symptom of political correctness or reverse racism,” he said.
Behind him, a row of police officers did not clap. But when Mr. Obama added, “We ask the police to do too much, and we ask too little of ourselves,” the officers behind him applauded.
The president appealed for an honest debate over the tensions inherent in policing and the nation’s legacy of racism. “It is forging consensus, and fighting cynicism, and finding the will to make change,” he said.
“I confess that sometimes, too, I experience doubt,” Mr. Obama said. “I’ve been to too many of these things. I’ve seen too many families go through this.”
Former President George W. Bush spoke earlier at the memorial. “Today the nation grieves, but those of us who love Dallas and call it home have had five deaths in the family,” Mr. Bush said. He added, “At times it seems like the forces pulling us apart are stronger than the forces binding us together.”
But, Mr. Bush said, “Americans, I think, have a great advantage. To renew our unity we only have to remember our values.”
Mr. Obama had huddled with his speechwriters for much of Monday, hoping to find words that would not only console the officers’ grief-stricken families but also reassure a nation fearful that racial divisions are worsening after the Dallas slaughter and the killing days before of black men by the police in Louisiana and Minnesota.
Mr. Obama approached the effort with the frustration of a man who has poured his heart and soul into similar speeches, only to later feel that nothing has changed and no one is listening. This was the 11th time in his presidency that he sought to comfort a city after a mass killing, and the second time in a month that such a killing grew out of bias.
“The president recognizes that it’s not just people in Dallas who are grieving, it’s people all across the country who are concerned about the violence that so many Americans have witnessed in the last week or so,” Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, said on Monday.
